---
title: Using Gremlin Java in TinkerPop 2.x
layout: post
---

Some organizations are single-minded in their choice of programming language.  They are "Java shops" or "Python shops" and there is no room for anything in between.  This choice often places developers in a position where they find new technology that would be useful in achieving their goals, but they are unable to use it because it uses a non-approved technology.  Gremlin, as it stands in TinkerPop 2.x, is best used in its Groovy form, as the syntatic sugar of Groovy helps form a simple and concise DSL for traversing graphs.  Unfortunately, Groovy is not always on the list of approved technology at these organizations that define themselves as a "Java Shop".  As such, developers in these organizations look to use Gremlin in its Java form.  

Unfortunately, Gremlin Java is quite verbose, which is largely a function of the way Java itself works.  Developers tend to have a hard time understanding the method in which their Gremlin Groovy converts to Java and, as a result, there tend to be many questions about the best way to go about doing this.

I recently provided an answer to "this question":http://stackoverflow.com/q/29409219/1831717 on StackOverflow where someone was trying to understand just how to do this.  I went into some detail on this topic and hopefully provided a nice tutorial for those who have this problem.  I think that in many ways, "this answer":http://stackoverflow.com/a/29411662/1831717 will become the reference that we point people to who have this problem.
